come to lecture in your study groups and sit with your study group together. Um
that way when something's confusing you have someone next to you that you can actually ask a question and I find that
this really makes a difference to the students uh as you go forward. So
strongly strongly recommend that whoever you're working with on homeworks get them to come to lecture and sit next to
you in the lecture room.
Okay. So, I'm going to try a couple of different ways of presenting the material today in terms of how I use the
technology. If you have any feedback on this, please let me know. Um, and I will
try to adapt to whatever is working with the best for the most number of people.
So, what we're going to do today uh is we're going to pick up where we left off last. Before I start officially,
um let me just remind you all that homework zero is due. When is homework
zero due? Tomorrow at 10:59 p.m. Friday. And what
happens if you don't submit homework zero? You're dropped from the class, right?
So, please submit homework zero. Don't accidentally get dropped from the class.
Don't wait till 10:58 to submit it and then have grades grow crash on you and then send us an email because the wait
list is so huge. And as you've probably seen, we are not able to respond to all of your emails. So, just, you know,
submit it at 10 p.m. instead of 10:59 p.m. That way, you have all this time to deal with any kind of buffer, whatever,
late submission, this that. Um, make sure it goes in. You've had more than a
week to complete it, and it should be all material that's based on prerequisites. Okay. Any administrative questions
before we start? Okay. So, the expansion is definitely
happening. You should all be getting emails and like be officially being led
into the class. We are hoping to clear the wait list. Okay, so all of you on
the wait list, fingers crossed. I cannot promise anything, but we are absolutely hoping to clear the weight list. Okay,
so uh uh that's the good news. Okay, so today
is all about optimization. We started talking about it last time and we're going to continue talking about it. The
first thing that I want to talk about is building on what we started off last time and talking about the implicit
regularization of gradient descent. So last time we talked about how gradient
descent converges for linear regression and we notice that what matters the most
is really this largest value of xrpose x or the largest singular value of the
matrix x itself. Right? Remember we saw this that you know we you you have to have the learning rate smaller than
this. If this is if you need to remember this go and look at the 127 notes so you
can recall this. And the key takeaway that I want you to remember from that is
that the geometric properties of your loss function matter in terms of the
practical parameters and hyperparameters that you will be using in tuning your functions. So here is a condition on ADA
your learning rate or your step size that is a function of the geometry of
your underlying loss function and here we did this for le squares or so it's a quadratic loss function but this is not
specific to le squares for example I had a question right after lecture it's like
I heard this thing about smoothness and like strong convexity and isn't
convergence supposed to depend on that so what smoothness and strong convexity are is they're essentially
generalizations of what we're looking at in terms of these quadratic functions to try and
sandwich other functions or approximate them using other quadratic functions. And so by looking at you know upper and
lower bounds of our desired function in terms of quadratic functions we can get
what is known as um strong convexity bounds. We call we call these mu strong
convexity usually or we can get smoothness bounds. We call these L is usually a parameter associated with that
L smoothness. And we can generalize this intuition that we have for uh gradient
descent on linear regression or quadratic loss problems to other
problems where what will matter is now the ratio of the smoothness to the uh
strong convexity parameter. Here what we found that matters in terms of the convergence rate was the ratio of the
largest to the smallest singular value. Right? Everyone remember that discussion from last time? Okay, great. So now
we're going to kind of build on this intuition about um singular values and
start talking about ridge and ridge regularization and think about how this leads to the implicit regular
regularization of um gradient descent. So remember that war star
is given by uh for ridge xrpose x plus lambda i inverse
xrpose y and we also said that this is equal to xrpose
xxrpose plus lambda i inverse
time y. Okay, these are the two ridge solutions. One is the straight form, the other is the kernel form.
And now we wanted to try and say well can we look at ridge in the SVD
coordinates. Right? Clearly we see even just from the straight convergence proof of gradient descent that the singular
values and the particular directions the um singular vectors matter in terms of
how gradient descent is going to behave. So let's look at ridge in those d in those coordinates as well. So here let's
say this SVD of X is U sigma VRpose
then I can write my W star as just filling this out. So coming from
here
if I just write this. So vranspose um sigma transpose
u * actually there should not be a transpose
here. This should be v sigma uranspose sigma transpose urpose u sigma vranspose
plus lambda i inverse XRPOSE again will give me a
U b sigma transpose uranspose
times y I'm just plugging in my svd here okay so now I can do some manipulations
of this and in particular what I will see here is that this u transpose is
just going to cancel right and then I have this identity here I can
write this identity as VVRpose because these are orthonormal matrices. Everyone remember that? And so I can just pull
these out and so I can rewrite this effectively equal to
V sigma transpose sigma plus lambda I whole inverse vranspose V
sigma transpose uranspose Y again. And now these vranspose
again because V is an orthonormal matrix VRpose is just its inverse. So that also
cancels. And so I'm left with
V V.
Okay. So, what does this look like when I try to write out this matrix? What is this
matrix in the middle? Well, this is an almost diagonal thing.
This is an almost diagonal thing. So, when I multiply them together, what am I going to have? I'm going to have
something with the squares of the singular values on the diagonal, as many singular values as I have. And what's
the rest going to be? It's going to be all zeros, right? And then I have this lambda time I which
is also diagonal. So the sum of these things to is going to be diagonal. And so I'll either have a singular value
squared plus lambda or I'll just have that lambda. Does everyone see that when I add those two matrices together? So
what I'm going to have is something of this form.
And then I'm going to have some lambdas here based on how these dimensions actually work out.
And this is all inverse. So what this means is when I try to
write out my w star, what do I get? I can write it
as vi coming from this v here. This V
here gives me the VI. Sigma I divided by sigma I^ 2 + lambda
times ui transpose time
y and how many terms are going to be in this sum?
Basically I'm going down the diagonal, right? So whatever my dimension is.
So what do I see here in this particular setup?
If I look at this now this particular quantity is what is
governing the scaling. So I'm thinking of this this uranspose y this is a
scalar. Does everyone see that this is a scaler? So now I'm basically
looking at my W star as in the SVD basis
and these are the coefficients for every single singular vector of my
matrix. Everyone see that? Because these are just scalers. So what is going to happen to
sigma i over sigma i^ 2 plus lambda if
um lambda is much much bigger than sigma like sigma is like one and lambda is a
million for example what is this quantity going to become
if lambda is really large basically lambda is going to dominate and this thing is going to become smaller and
smaller and smaller, right? It's going to kind of tend to zero as lambda goes to infinity, right? For a
fixed sigma i. So what this means is that if I have
some small singular values compared to my ridge regularization parameter
lambda, what's going to happen is that are those vectors going to really show
up in my optimal solution? No. There those components are just decaying away,
right? Whereas on the other hand, what happens to this sigma i^ 2 plus lambda when I
have u sigma i is much bigger than lambda. Well, then this just behaves
like 1 / sigma i, right? Because I have a sigma i over
sigma i squar approximately this is like 1 over sigma i. So I'm going to get that
component there. And what this means is that the directions that have low
singular values don't show up in your optimal solution
with ridge. Right? And by varying lambda, you can vary how easy it is for
those low singular values to show up. Now what are those directions? When you think intuitively about what does it
mean for a particular direction to have a low singular value. So take a minute and
like find a person next to you and talk to them about this. What does it mean when a direction is a low singular value
or a high singular? I'm going to give you one minute to actually talk.
[Music]
Yeah.
[Applause]
30 minutes.
And that was
Okay, that's a minute. That's one minute. So, if you want these
breaks to talk, then you have to stop when I say stop. Otherwise, we'll never finish. Okay. So, what is the impact of
having a um what what does it mean to have a small singular value? What does that
mean for those directions in terms of the data? Yeah, low variance. Low variance, right? So the large
singular values capture directions that have a lot of variance in the data. The small singular values are the ones that
don't have that that much variance in the data. So what that means is that when you look at your data points,
right, what is X made of? X is made of basically the rows of X are your data points. Those directions that are not
represented in the data are the directions that have small singular values.
So if you don't have a lot of information about particular directions, maybe you shouldn't actually be paying
too much attention to those when you're trying to fit your function. Remember we
started talking about ridge because ridge or regularization in general is a
common solution to the problem of overfitting. Where does overfitting happen? When you're too married to your
particular training data points because you're like, "Oh my gosh, I love my training data. I'm so happy to have it. let me try to fit it absolutely
perfectly. But you fit in these directions that miss maybe aren't, you
know, really representative. You're just fitting some noise and it reduces your generalization. It reduces your
performance on the test data. So by ignoring the directions or putting
less weight on the directions that have low variability, you can actually improve your performance, right? And that's why regularization in general is
um can be a very good thing. So regularization is not just about
incorporating some kind of side information about your data. For example, you know that your true vector
might be small or if you use ton of maybe you know that your true vector is close to some other vector or you know
something about specific components. But what it's trying to say is that look you know maybe you don't want to move in
those directions where there are um low singular values. Okay make sense to everyone.
So what I want to remind you now if I look at for example my gradient descent update this is what it looks like for
um again the just the le squares problem here I'm not thinking about rich I'm not regularizing it but what you'll notice
here is that there's this xrpose that multiplies this vector here right and so
this vector this vector is basically your residual
right or your error that you're when you're currently predicting your current best guess is wt and so x wt
minus y is how bad are you at predicting y on your training data
and what is xrpose xrpose is your data so basically what this says is that my
gradient descent will always take a step only in the span of the data I can never
leave the span of the data does is that clear using gradient descent so always
remains in the span assuming you initialize at
zero of the data.
The other thing that I'll briefly mention because it might come up later. If I look at the gradient descent update
for a ridge, it has a similar property
and I have wt + 1 is equal to
um 1 - 2 a lambda
- 2 a times
So basically when I look at this um gradient descent update for ridge, what
I have here is this extra term on the WT. If I compare it to the
I don't see a siren blaring telling us to get out of the room. So I think we can continue.
So if I didn't if my lambda was zero, I'm just at back at gradient descent, right?
What is this doing? What is this term doing? This is coming from the regularization.
And what it's saying is look every time maybe just like down weight a little bit
on WT right it's pulling down the weight it used to in gradient descent this would be one this is saying do something
slightly less than one okay and so this term is called sometimes
uh weight decay
and what you'll see is that uh we haven't what you'll see is that gradient descent actually has this implicit
regularization property that I'm going to talk about in just a minute and so often when you're implementing
uh gradient descent in deep learning we will not actually have an explicit
regularization we will not include a ridge parameter or a lasso parameter or anything like that
and even then there will be a regularizing effect and there are other tricks that we can use by which we can
avoid overfitting even though we might not have an explicit regularization. So I'm going to talk about that next.
However, sometimes there are other benefits to not having your weights get too large. And so sometimes even though
you won't have a ridge term in your loss, what you will do is you will include some kind of weight decay
schedule that will you know just kind of keep pulling your weights down by a little bit to avoid them from getting
too big. So this is another thing that this is a piece of terminology that I wanted to put out there that sometimes
regularization weight decay and now what I'm going to talk about as implicit regularization and early stopping of
gradient descent are all talked about sometimes in the same breath and sometimes interchangeably and they all
mean the spiritually same idea implemented in slightly different ways. So what I want you to understand is that
whatever when someone's talking about this that's the kind of idea that they're talking about. Okay, everyone
with me? Questions? Okay, good. So now let's go back to gradient
descent. And now what I want to get to is this implicit regularization.
And what do I mean by that?
So, I'm going to take again um my gradient descent update equation and I'm
going to write it out. But now I'm going to write it out in my SVD basis.
So to write it out in my SVD basis, I'm just going to do a change of basis. Multiply by VRpose.
So I'm multiplying the whole equation by VRpose. This xrpose I'm going to replace
with the svd. So I get a v sigma transpose
u uranspose and then I have this x wt
minus y. And so when this I change bases into
this new coordinate. Let me call this new vector w tilda. Let's say
so now I'm this new basis minus 2 ADA. These vranspose V's cancel.
Um
so then I have this sigma transpose and then I can pull this urpose into here I
have a U sigma V transpose WT
minus URPOSE Y. This is equal to then
W tilda T transpose minus 2 ADA. These uranspose U's cancel. This thing I'm
going to pull into becoming another W tilda because now this is just expressing my old WT in the SVD basis.
Everyone see that?
So then I have a sigma transpose sigma w
tilda t minus uranspose y.
So now what has happened by me writing this in the svd basis? Let me look at
this. Right? This is a vector. But what has happened to this thing? What kind of matrix is this?
This is again a diagonal matrix, right? This is a diagonal matrix. So now when I
look at the different components of WT, they're no longer coupled, right? By transforming into the SVD basis, I've
basically diagonalized my problem. And now I can look at this component by component. So I can basically look at
the E component.
And that is 2 ADA times I basically have this sigma i^ 2 w tilda t
minus sigma i and then whatever is the component I'm just going to call this y
i twiddle right I don't really care about this is just some scalar here
so what do I notice when I look at this
this singular value is showing up right
and so when I'm taking so this is the step that I'm taking in the direction of
the i singular vector does everyone see that now we've projected into that basis
so this is the step that I'm taking according to that direction everyone with me there
okay folks I need you to like give me some feedback, thumbs up, thumbs down, like
because otherwise I will keep barreling at you and you will understand nothing. But if you tell me that you don't
understand, then there's a hope that I might tell you again. I still might not, but at least there's a chance, right?
So, you're good. Please nod. Give me thumbs up, thumbs down. Is there a typo on the third?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, this is all the I component and this is a uh these are not vectors anymore actually. This is
okay. So when you look at singular values yes
question yeah I was just curious on the second line um where you crossed out the
transpose Yes. Where did the go and then the line after that?
I expressed this in the V basis. Oh, it's a different basis. Okay. Thank you. Because I put a twiddle here.
So now we're looking at this in this basis and what I see is that the size of the
singular value matters for how big a step I can take. I pulled this singular
value inside. But maybe actually it's even clearer to write it as wti twiddle minus 2 a sigma i times sigma wt
comma i minus yi
right so you can think of this as your residual you know are you already
matching in this direction or not but if you're not matching how big the step you take depends yes on your learning rate
but it also depends on the singular value. So for the big singular values,
you're going to take big steps and for the small singular values, you're going to take small steps, right? So you're
going to be moving faster in some directions than you are in others. And singular values tend to vary when you
think when you just look at them for a matrix, they tend to vary across orders
of magnitude. So you know you will have singular values that are like 10 or 100
10 five and then you'll have some singular values that are like 10 the minus2 10 the minus 5 10 the minus there
they're they can be very small so there's a huge variation in these and so when you're plotting singular values
it's a good rule of thumb when you're looking at these things sometimes it can be useful to plot on log scale you might
not see the kind of variation that you need to see when you plot on linear scale so just a trick to keep in mind if you're ever trying to debug your code in
this uh in this kind of stuff. And so what's going to happen? Let's say
I have all of these directions to different directions to move in. Right? So let's say I have just a two dimensional setup and I have a really
big singular value uh this way and a really small singular value that way. Right? I'm going to take big steps along
this direction and I'm going to converge pretty quickly along those big singular values. But I still have not moved as
much in the other direction where the singular value is small. Okay. So what
does this mean? If I let's say don't run gradient descent to convergence.
If I somehow do what is called early stopping of gradient descent.
Gradient descent naturally has this property that it likes moving along
large singular values more than it likes moving along small singular values. So it'll do the large singular values first
and only then later do the small singular values. So if I stop early
without running to convergence, what's going to happen is that I'm not going to move in those directions that have small
singular values that maybe I didn't want to move in anyways because that's what my ridge was doing,
right? That's exactly what this term is doing in ridge. I
haven't actually put any ridge par regularization on this. There's no ridge penalty. But if I say I stop early,
I will get the same benefit. So you you might hear this term early stopping.
Have have people ever heard of this term early stopping in machine learning?
And so early stopping doesn't literally mean I mean it can it can mean just you know stop doing gradients descent at a
random early point before it has converged. But often what this means is that you actually run gradient descent
for a long time and then you keep you have training checkpoints for your model
and then you go back and you pick that training checkpoint that actually performs best before you start running
into the overfitting regime. So you might have some training loss curve is coming down down down down and then maybe it starts going up because you're
starting to overfit. So then you find that checkpoint where you've actually done the best. And now what this is
saying is this is giving you a reason for why that's a totally valid thing to do. It's not some arbitrary let's well
there's a lot of magic and alchemy in deep learning. But there's an element of principled alchemy, right? This is
explaining to you why this is just like doing regularization. Does that make sense? Questions?
Yes. So did you say it converges in the directions with high singular values
first but then it still converges the low value it will keep going. So for example right
if I if I now move let's say I have these two directions I can move it right I'm moving a two dimensional so I can
either move this way or this way and I'm taking these giant steps this way but now I've reached my optimum.
If I've reached my optimum what does that mean for this term?
It's zero right? So I'm not going to move like let's say I have a possibility let's say
I'm working with a problem where I can actually reach zero loss then now that I have reached my optimum
my large singular values are no longer going to move and then now there's gradient pressure to make steps in the
directions of the small singular values right now to decrease my loss I can't I can't decrease my loss by moving in this
direction anymore I've already zeroed out my residual so now I have to start moving this way and I'll get there but
my singular so small it'll go like this. Okay. But it will still move along. But I will still eventually move there.
But maybe this is just maybe I'm just fitting noise in doing this and I don't really want to be doing it.
Does that make sense? Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
AIS and you move across that ais
So I'm expressing gradient descent here in the SVD basis. So that's it's a
gradient descent isn't saying well I will move in direction V1 and then V2 and then V3 and then V4. This is what is
happening kind of in the back it's not even in the back end it's just happening but it's it's a perspective it's a lens
through which you're viewing the standard gradient descent update which is not done component wise it's done in
whatever braces you're in. You're decomposing into the SVD basis.
Okay. So in the SVD basis your data set moves only one direction at a time.
No no it will move in all directions but it will do the best thing. So it will move the step size it will take in each
direction is proportional to the singular value in that direction. So it will move in this way and this way but
the step horizontally will be this big and the step vertically will be this big.
Okay. So you're just going to get to your optimum in this direction much slower. So for example, your optimum
might be, you know, you might want need to move in this direction a little bit, but you've already converge along this
axis. Yes. Question at the back. Yeah. So kind of along that line, if you have a smaller singular value which
corresponds to you like in theory need to go a shorter direction like shorter
distance in that orthogonal direction to reach your optimum for that smaller variance sigma. So, so you you don't so
so you're you're there the the the residual which is the distance to your
optimum is not a function of your singular value. That's whatever it is. Just because your singular value is
small doesn't mean your initial is somehow magically close to your that's a function of where you've initialized.
Right? The question was like the small singular values means you're closer to your optimum in that direction or not.
But no. Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay, good. Yes, question.
Yeah, I just want to make sure that I get you right. So the right intuition is that for large singular value directions, you move a proportionally
larger reser distance as you run gradient descent early on and then as uh those will converge first and so when
you keep running then you start optimizing the smaller. Exactly. Exactly. Because you you know you have you have some amount of
gradient pressure and if you can just like you have to choose a direction, right? There's a trade-off, right? You
know I can I can I I only have a certain step size. I can take and I can choose to distribute that component. I can
choose to distribute my vector that I'm taking a step in. You know, I can have a component in each orthogonal direction.
The directions of the SVD are orthogonal. My step size is still fixed. So, I can't have large components in
every direction, but proportionally the large singular values will pull a larger component. And so, there won't be that
much step size left to take in the smaller direction. Okay? you have to spread it across whatever dimensions you
have. These are good questions. Okay, last question.
Is the second line second to last? Is that supposed to be a vector? Is that
Yeah, that's probably not a vector.
Okay, awesome. Okay, good. So with this um basically I hope you've learned that
geometry matters and that it's a good thing to look at even simple cases
because it turns out that this intuition generalizes to um you know other larger
other larger problems that you know we looked at this in the case of um just le
squares with a quadratic loss but early stopping is something that is commonly used in training lots of networks.
even though you might not be working exactly on the le squares problem for linear regression. So these kinds of
intuitions are helpful and that's kind of what we're going to be building today and uh and the next class. Okay, good.
So I haven't written down much about early stopping but is everyone clear on that? You can Google early stopping if
you can't find this and you'll find um you'll find information on it as well. Okay, last question. Can you explain
what the implicit Okay. What is the implicit regularization here?
So maybe I'll write this out.
Okay. So what is the implicit regularization?
So in a ridge if lambda is large
uh we don't move in directions
of small singular values. Actually I shouldn't
say we don't move. So I should say we don't
have large components
of um directions
with large singular with small singular values in the ridge
solution. Okay, is that clear to everyone? So and ridge is regularizing
right. So it's basically saying one there's many lenses of looking at regularization. One's lens by which we
can look at regularization is to say don't move in directions of small singular values.
Gradient descent with early stopping
also does not move
in directions of
small singular values.
Does that make sense? So that's why this is regularizing.
Can we wait for office hours? Are you still moving? What? You're still moving. You're still moving. I mean, ridge is
not saying don't move either. It's just saying you move quite a bit less. This is not zero.
That's like zero. We don't It moves a little bit. Okay.
Sure. Does not move. A better terminology would be the
weights at the end are proportionally less. Yeah. But I mean this is so these are
all like these are all intuitions for getting you there, right? Yes. You're moving but you're moving you know does
not move or moves very little
in directions of small singular values. So yes it's not that you're not moving at all. It's totally possible to move
small amounts but your your step size is proportional basically to the to the to the to the value to the
singular value. Okay. Good.
Okay, so with that I want to now get to the next part of optimization which I'm
sure you've all seen before is stochastic gradient descent, right? So
gradient descent is great. Gradient descent works wonderfully for convex functions,
but guess what? Like real life is hard and real life includes non-convex
functions. If everything we wanted to optimize was convex, life would really would be really nice. And in particular,
fitting neural networks and deep neural networks requires being able to optimize over long
non-convex landscapes. So what do we do? Basically, SGD is um is the solution
that leads us to be able to um have better generalization in these non-convex landscapes. The other thing
about gradient descent is that when you have lots and lots and lots of data, computing the gradient over many many
many many many data points is computationally expensive. What SGD does
is it gives you a way of being a little bit lazy and saying I'm going to only
compute the gradient in in certain spaces and over a certain subset of my
data and move in that direction. Okay, so everyone here has seen some version
of state SGD before like your machine learning class has covered this, right? So you know the basic idea. Okay, good.
So what is SGD doing? SGD is thinking about basically this setup where you
have a loss function here. And now I'm calling my loss function f and theta is
my parameter and I have this loss function that decomposes as a sum of other loss
functions and many many common loss functions that we like to think about actually have
this property. So for example if I just think about my standard squared loss function which is our canonical you know
we don't know what anything is doing. Let us try a loss function and understand how it behaves. We always try the same loss function. Well, when I
look at this le squares loss function, I can think about it as
you know the argument over this is the same as a normalized version of that. I can just uh average the over the number
of data points. But this is basically the same as looking at the loss per data
point. Right? So I can think of my squared loss as actually the loss on the first data
point plus the loss on the second data point plus the loss on the third data point. So on and so forth. So I
naturally have a way of taking my loss function and decomposing it into this sum of component loss functions.
Now if I wanted to take a gradient step and do proper gradient descent, I had to take the gradient for the loss with
respect to every single data point. If n is large, that's a lot of data points.
What if instead I took the lazy approach and I said let's just take a few of you
and you take what is called a batch or a mini batch
and say instead of taking the gradient over all of the data points I will take
the gradient over just some subset of data points I'll pick B of them
uniformly at random iid and this is my batch and that's the
gradient step I take everything else is exactly the same. So sometimes you will hear people
talking about full batch gradient descent or full batch SG. Full batch SGD
is just gradient descent because you're taking all of your data
um into uh and accounting for that in your gradient. Okay.
So what this is doing is this is saying ideally I have a certain gradient and I
would like to move in that direction. Instead I'm going to move in this direction that is you know um
in expectation the same but slightly different. So I can think of it as a noisy version of my gradient um instead
of moving exactly in the direction of the gradient. And when I think about what I'm doing in expectation, well, in
expectation, the gradient of each of these is just the gradient of my true function, right? Because I'm basically
to taking I'm looking at a uniform iid, which gives me a one. If I have n different data points, I have a one
overn probability of picking each of these and I average over all of them. That just returns to me my original
gradient. So on average I'm doing exactly what gradient descent would do but I'm doing it a little bit more uh
more shakily. Questions on this? Everyone clear on what SGD is? You should have seen this
before. So what are some advantages of this?
Basically, we see that you know the one nice thing about it is that yes, it is
noisy, but it still always improves the fit on a subset of the data, not all of
the data. The second advantage of it is that it is actually computationally
less expensive because you have to compute fewer gradients. And the third nice property of it is that because
you're not always going in the direction of the gradient, sometimes you can escape local minima and saddle points,
right? So let's say I have like something like this where I have some
local minima and then a bigger ravine. Gradient discount can get stuck in that local minima. But stocastic gradient
descent because it's noisy sometimes it will do things that are not exactly in the direction of the optimal gradient
and that will allow it to get out of a local minima and escape to somewhere else. Okay, so that's great but
typically when you take some algorithm and you add a bunch of noise to it, it doesn't perform better, it performs
worse. Right? We have these nice convergence guarantees for gradient descent. What about SGD?
So in general, one of the things that if you just read about SGD um you know anywhere in a standard textbook, what
you will hear is that the optimization perspective says that we need to have a
decreasing step size or a learning rate schedule that allows for the ADA itself
to get smaller over time which will allow SGD to converge. If you don't do
that because the gradient is noisy, you'll get close to the solution. you'll get close to the optimal, but then
you'll just do this like bouncing around, dancing around it because your gradient is never actually hitting zero.
You're just kind of on average zero, but you're never actually exactly zero. So you you'll see this kind of bouncing.
And if I have time, I'll try to show you a demo of this. We'll see if I actually get to it.
But in practice, what you see is that sometimes SGD can actually converge with constant step sizes. And I'm going to
try to show you a proof uh at the end of class of why this actually happens um
for the least squares case and we'll or not the least squares case but really the um underdetermined um case of having
a linear system that you're trying to fit questions here. We're good.
So for example, this is a really nice picture from the prince book. So what
you're seeing here is a lost landscape. The valleys are the dark colors. The
peaks are kind of these lighter colors. And what you see is you have three different initialization points. One,
two, and three. And when you do gradient descent, well, you know, you initialize at one and it
kind of finds its way to the right minimum. When you initialize at three, it finds its way to the right minimum.
But two kind of takes a different path and doesn't really get you to the
minimum the the global minimum it takes you to a different local minimum and it kind of gets stuck there. Does everyone
see that from this uh picture? Stoastic gradient descent on the other hand because it's not taking the optimal
gradient step in every time point instead of kind of going off in this direction which is where the optimal
gradient would have pointed you. It happens to have a batch where the gradient kind of points this direction
and it allows it to escape falling into that local minimum over there and actually converge to um a better
minimum. Yes. Question. Also fall into the wory.
It could also do bad things. Yes, it's entirely possible that it will do bad things. there's no guarantee um except
that we will actually show that in some cases you can provably show that gradient descent uh will converge to the
right optimum but there's there's no guarantees on this right especially in these complicated non-convex spaces it it it
could go to the bad place but the thing that kind of gives you hope is that you know on average it's doing the the right
thing um and there's many many different components to the gradient there's many different batches you get lots and lots
of tries at this questions.
Okay, so that's really what I want to say about SGD. I want to get to one more thing and then if we have time at the
end, I'm going to try and walk you through a proof of convergence of uh stoastic gradient descent which will try
to which will kind of bring out more properties of SG as we go through it.
But SGD or gradient descent, both of these
are still, you know, they're they're great algorithms, but we always want to be able to do better. And the one thing
that we can do to do better, there's many things, and we're going to talk about momentum today. We will talk about Adam in the next class
as sequential or as as a series of improvements that have come to get
gradient descent to be better and better and better as an algorithm.
So let's think about gradient descent. Again, we can just think about this scalar case. Um remember if we look at
things in the SVD basis, now we just talked about this a bunch. Essentially everything just reduces to this scalar
case. Right? So understanding this scalar case is equivalent to thinking about a gradient descent in the vector
case but looking at it in the SVD basis and we know that basically our step size
had better be smaller than uh sigma max squ to be able to get to the minimum
uh or to be able to converge at all. So what does this what does this mean? If I
look at this particular quantity. Okay. So I have a range of different values for ADA. ADA could be zero or the
largest thing ADA could be is one over sigma squ. So what happens when ADA is zero? What
is the value of this particular what is this value or what is this like this is the this is this is
uh determining the convergence rate of this recurrence relation. Right? So
well when sigma is zero when ada is zero sorry this is just one and when a is is
at its largest size well this is negative one right so I can think about these igen values basically I can think
about them as igen values in the complex plane but you know we happen to have
uh no imaginary part for any of these for this particular example
if you had imaginary parts you would get oscillations But we're not really going to worry about that right now.
And so when I have values, let's say that are, you know, over here between 0 and one, I have these positive but
convergent igen values, I'm going to get this kind of exponential decay, right,
of my error, and it's just going to go uh exponentially to zero.
On the other hand, kind of as ADA increases and I'm moving over closer and closer to here, as I get closer and
closer to zero, what's going to happen to the shape of this exponential? I'm going to start decreasing faster and faster, right? As I get closer to zero,
but then what happens as soon as I kind of flip to the other side of zero,
I'm going to start seeing some oscillations now because I'm multiplying by a minus one every time, right? So I'm
still going to converge, but I'm going to start doing things like bouncing around to converge. I'm going to start
my error convergence is going to start looking like this. And eventually these oscillations will
kind of get bigger and bigger and bigger and then I'll stop being able to converge. That oscillation will force me
to diverge as I cross this minus one boundary. Does this does this make sense of what
we're we're doing? Okay.
So what's going to happen is that basically this max singular value is going to dictate
the learning rate I can choose right I have a learning rate and it's always the same for every direction doesn't I'm not
be able to pick we might we'll we'll talk about this later but one of the key challenges here is that we cannot our
algorithm does not allow us to pick a different ADA for every different direction.
So I can choose a good ADA that will allow me to converge reasonably fast in
my largest singular value. But that could still mean a lot slower
convergence for other directions that have smaller singular values. Right? These might these might not be tiny
singular values in which I don't want to move and I don't care about. They might be like medium singular values but I still might converge slowly in them
because my ADA is picked based on my maximum one. Okay.
So can we basically do something to to sm to improve our conversions? Can we
somehow smooth out some of these oscillations? Right? We might like if we want to keep making ADA bigger.
Oscillations are bad, but can we smooth them out? Is there something we can do to improve our convergence rate while
not oscillating too much? Okay, is that's the problem that we want to try and tackle. Okay. And that is the
problem that momentum is trying to solve. Is everyone with me on what the problem is?
That we have different singular values and we want to kind of not just focus on the largest one. We want to be somewhat
uh equitable. So when you have oscillations,
what's the way of smoothing out oscillations? Like what's your intuition? What have you seen before?
decrease magnitude. Decrease magnitude of what? The mountain you're jumping by.
That's dictated by ADA, right? We can't actually decrease the magnitude on one singular value without affecting the
other singular values. So yeah, moving average. Keep a moving average, right? That's a
way of same idea. Yeah. Okay. So keep a moving average, right? The idea is to say that
if you're bouncing around a lot, well, don't bounce so much. And if you keep
averaging yourself, you're going up and down and up and down. If you average, you're going to kind of zero out yourself. And then you might oscillate
less. Okay? So then the question comes, well, how much do I average? Right? Do I average
the past two steps, the past three steps, the past five steps? How do I think about this average?
The thing about deep learning and just learning algorithms in general is that you're not like you want to also be able
to implement these algorithms. And so when I think about taking an average, that is my standard intuition for
reducing oscillations. But let's say I want to do a moving average window of 10. That means I have to remember the
gradient of the past 10 points and then average it average them. Maybe I want to do a larger window. You know, I don't
know. This is again one more hyperparameter that has now been introduced that I have to tune. What is the right amount of averaging? Okay,
but what is another way that we know to do averaging or for those of you who
have heard have you ever has anyone heard the term low pass filter? Yeah. So the EES in the room definitely have 16A
have definitely heard uh uh what a low pass filter is. So a low pass filter is
something that's saying take my high frequency oscillations and smooth them out, right? don't have high frequencies
in my signal. Keep only the low low pass the low frequencies. Right? Big oscillations are high frequencies.
A low pass filter is basically an average averaging mechanism. And we have these in nature everywhere, right? And
these are often coming when we have a a kind of state in our system.
So one example of this just comes from circuits straight up circuits. So for
example if I have this is a standard low RC lowass filter what do I have is I
have just this uh resistance and as VIN changes my V out is going to change but
what this capacitor is going to do is is going to dampen my change right so for
example if this um if my VN is pretty
constant right if my VN is pretty constant what's going to happen is my capacitor is just going to saturate no
current is going to flow this Okay. And then VN is just going to be equal to V out. That's what for a constant input.
But now if my VN is like going up and down and up and down, what's going to happen is I'm going to charge discharge
charge discharge charge discharge my capacitor and it's going to eat up some of that charge. What's going to come out
at V out is going to be a smooth version, a much smooth version. It's going to be an automatic averaging of
what VN is. And the way this is being done is basically through maintaining state, right? The charge on the
capacitor is dictating whether the capacitor is acting like a short or like an open circuit. And therefore what
we're seeing is that averaged version. The nice thing
about this is this is essentially doing averaging. But do I need to now what is
the memory required to implement this? Do I need to remember the 10 past values? No. The state is automatically
changing. It's the state space model now. And so automatically my memory is being captured by this capacitor. I
don't want to take questions about the circuits here because I know that people probably have forgotten their circuits.
Go remind yourself of this. But basically this is a straight differential equation that this is this is modeling, right? For a step input of
V, you have this exponential decay that you can um you can capture. What I want
you to get is the physics intuition of this. And you know we talked about in the first lecture of how essentially
there's we're looking at analog circuits. That's what neural networks are in some sense. And these intuitions
help us actually understand a lot of what's going on. So if we take this and we actually
discretise what this is doing, we can think of this in the following
way. Where is my pointer?
I can think of maintaining a state. So I take think of this zk as my state
variable. And I update my zk plus one at every iteration as some beta time zk. So
basically where I was previously or what my previous gradient was plus 1 minus
beta times the new gradient that I have got in okay
so what is happening when I when I do this so let's say z is zero and just
take one minute and try to write out use this recurrence relation start with z not is zero and try to write out what
how zen not is evolving so that you will see what is going on so take a minute write this out, discuss with your
neighbor. You know, the two of you can uh do it on one piece of paper to encourage interaction. So,
I'll give you one minute. I have a timer.
Just sit there.
[Music]
Okay. So, what's happening here as I run this?
What what does what does Z1 look like?
Right? Everyone got what I got? Basically, I just have, you know, this
is just zero. So, I just have this one term here. Okay. But then what happens the next
time step? This thing goes and populates here
and I get a new term here. Now it gets multiplied by this beta. So I have a
beta* 1 minus beta. Then this whole thing gets now multiplied again by another um uh beta term. And so now if I
look at my state, my Z's, how are they evolving? where there's some weight
times my oldest gradient and then the slightly larger weight times my middle gradient and then the largest weight is
on my most recent gradient. Right? So I have this exponentially decaying average
that is saying take my history of gradients put less weight on the ones
that were really way back when when we knew nothing. put more weight on the current data
um but use this to keep kind of moving in
the direction that you were moving in. So if you get some like you know crazy outlier point what this is saying is
that if you were moving in this direction and this was kind of working even if you have a huge thing you're
still you're not going to completely change course and move just in the direction of the new gradient but the
momentum that you were moving in previously is going to keep you moving a little bit in that direction.
Does that does that make sense? That's why this is called momentum. There's like a physics analogy that uh people
are thinking about maybe like a a a ball rolling. The momentum is just like keep doing
what you were doing. Don't always just follow the new thing. Okay. It's a good
uh strategy for life too to be grounded. Whatever new trendy thing comes in, you don't have to jump on the boat every
time. Especially for those of you who are interested in deep learning. It's going to be hard. The times are crazy.
So finding ways to be grounded is just a good useful life strategy. Little bit of
uh philosophy in there. Okay. So does everyone see what this kind of
momentum term is is trying to do and how it's actually helping us.
So if I look now at so this is now this is now so this we
just talked about momentum in the context of gradient descent. But I can also do momentum with stochastic
gradient descent. Right? And typically that's what we will be we we do do. And now in stoastic gradient descent, my
gradients are already noisy. So when I do momentum, I'm just basically getting
more averaging, right? And so in a in a sense it's it's going to be helpful.
It's going to be better. There is a downside with stoastic gradient descent is that I'm averaging, but I'm averaging
noisy things. So the noise from my early iterates it might have been really high
and it might have been really big because my gradient was large then is going to creep in later. So there is
like this downside in the sense uh of momentum as well when you're doing it in
SGD and there's a trade-off always if like how big do you make your sliding window and effectively the choice of the
beta parameter is what is dictating how big you make your sliding window.
Uh does that make sense? uh but momentum basically helps with SGD for the very
same reason that it helps with uh gradient descent.
And now again this is from uh the prince book. I think this is a really great figure. So what you have here is you
have these two different initializations and this is stoastic gradient descent uh
converging to the optimum but it takes this like really noisy shaky bumpy path. But what you see when you have SGD with
momentum is that these paths are kind of much smoother because they're they're not jumping around as much because
they're low pass filtered, right? The the spikes have all kind of uh gone down
quite a bit. Okay, I've talked a lot. I'll pause for
questions. Yes. So this general like smoothing
effect is the end result of it. Basically you have less iterations to get to a minimum.
Yes. Okay. So what's the bang for the buck? Um we don't care like you know I could
have an ugly trajectory you're saying but you know I'm not here for the visualizations. I'm here for getting to
the minimum. So what's who cares? Who cares if my trajectory is is is is smoother or not? So what you can prove
you can provably show that actually um this will actually this will this will
improve convergence and if you remember gradient descent kind of has a convergence rate that depends on the
condition number. What you will find with momentum is that your convergence rate will actually depend on the square root of the condition number. So you
will actually drastically improve your um your convergence rate. So you will get
to the um get to the minimum faster. So you can you can actually theoretically prove
guarantees like this when you uh when you choose the right choice of beta. So
again the right choice of the learning rate and the beta parameter matters. So
the advantage is basically that you can converge faster. The downside in the sense is that now you have this beta
parameter that's one more hyperparameter that you had to figure out and you had to figure out the right uh right value
for it. So yes, long story short, you will converge faster. In practice, uh
sometimes people find that just momentum with SGD doesn't improve things that
much. And that's what leads to things like atom and other algorithms that we're going to talk about uh in the next
class. But theoretically, you have guarantees that actually improve its performance and the and it does improve
performance basically. Yes. Would doing something like just normal moving averages be okay rather
than doing like this exponential decay of an average? So would doing something like normal moving averages be okay? It would be
okay. I mean no one's preventing you from writing your own optimizer and running it and it would work. But when
you do moving averages, you're being inefficient and you're you're having your uh you're using more compute
essentially, right? You're having you're using more memory. You have a certain server. It has a certain uh memory and
it has a certain uh power, right? And so you want to be smart about how you
allocate it. And so you what is the advantage of converging faster? Well, that's less money you have to pay
essentially, right? That's why you want to get to the optimum faster. So you could do the moving average but
now you've basically doubled the uh uh you know if you want to have a moving
window average of size 10 then you have 10 numbers that you had to remember whereas now when I look at the momentum
equations here where did they go right if I look at the momentum equations here
really I've only doubled my memory doubling is still a thing but I'm now just remembering my
uh W's and my Z's and my my Z's are what is updating. So I replace the gra I'm
replacing the gradient update here. I forgot to say this but just to be explicit. My gradient descent is WK + 1 equal to W
K minus ADA. And here I would have the gradient with momentum. Instead of the gradient I have this moving average of
gradients that's represented by the ZK. Make sense?
Yes. Also, if you just did a straight moving average, would you just keep going in direction? Like, assuming
there's enough of a run, you have so much momentum just keep rolling over. Oh, you're saying that if you did a
moving average with no with no decaying weight. Yeah, you might end up in this position where you have like a huge
large gradient at the beginning and you know, you're subsequent gradients are decreasing, but you're not even taking that into uh into account because you
have a lot of weight on the on the beginning. So you wouldn't I mean you wouldn't be taking advantage of the
currentness of your update if you didn't decay your weight. So just a moving average. But what what would be
reasonable is to do a moving average of a small window size. So you don't want to ever be averaging all of your
gradients. But something that is reasonable is just to say like I'm going to average the past five gradients or the past 10 gradients and forget the
ones that were 100 time steps ago. Okay. Good.
Okay, so we have a little bit of time and I'm going to try and now walk you through this proof for uh actually how
stoastic gradient descent can uh converge.
So what are we trying to do here? We are trying to do what we've been doing so
far is take a simple case of SGD and try and understand at the guts level of why
this thing can or cannot work so that when we're trying to develop new
algorithms, we can rely on our core understanding of
how this should behave in the simple cases. Right? when you're looking at some loss plot like this is the common
thing that everyone kind of runs up into is that you've now implemented your code it's lines and lines of code maybe some
LLM wrote half of it how do you even know that what your system is doing like
you know you optimize something you got some fit is it doing the right thing is there a bug is there not a bug like
debugging these things is a beast the point of trying to teach you all of
this math behind things is to give you the intuition efficient so that you can look at simple cases and say hey can I
intuitively understand what this is doing in cases where I can reason about
so that I can see what whether whether my implementation is correct or not okay so there's a there's a there's a reason
for kind of understanding this at this nitty-gritty level even though there's a automatic library that you can you know
download and just implement you don't need to understand this to implement SGD
But you do need to understand this to develop the next algorithm to debug these things in complicated cases.
That's what we're trying to teach you. So let's consider a case of SGD where
you actually can get to zero loss. So I'm thinking of an underdetermined system and maybe I'm trying to get to
the uh minimum norm solution. So I have X where um it's a wide matrix.
So D is bigger than N. This is this N byD matrix that I have here.
And I'm assuming here that I have full row rank. So
uh I can easily do an xxrpose inversion. Okay. So let war star be the minimum
norm solution. In this case there's infinitely many solutions because I have an underdetermined system. Let's pick
the minimum norm one. We know exactly what it is. It's given by this expression.
And now let's say what let's try and explore what happens when we do SGD just
with batch size one. Okay. So before doing that what I want to just do is I
want to say let's look at the system but in a slightly transformed space. So what
I'm going to do is I'm going to say instead of looking at W which is my
optimal parameter I want to look at the error of my optimal parameter. So I want to look at the difference between
W, which is where I currently am, and W star. Okay. So I'm just going to do a,
you know, transformation of coordinates and instead of looking at W's, I'm going
to look at Q's where Q is the distance of where I currently am to W star. Does that make sense to everyone? So instead
of writing XW is equal to Y, I'm going to write XQ equal to zero where Q is
just my error. No big deal.
So we know from the SVD now that all that matters really for us is the directions with the nonzero singular
values. Obviously I cannot move in directions where I have no data points because I can SGD and gradient descent
will only move me in the directions of the data points. So you know let's go to the SVD basis. we have evidence that
this is a a useful thing to do. So I can look at my xq and I write it in
the svd basis. So I have here u sigma vranspose * q
and now sigma is a wide matrix right because my x is a wide matrix so it's of
the following form where sigma 1 is this diagonal matrix here and then I have a bunch of zeros afterwards right so this
is a square n byn part and this is an n * d minus n part
okay and I can just rewrite this therefore as kind of These zeros aren't going to
matter. So I write this as this X twiddle time Z where this is now the
part that I care about. X twiddle is just my U sigma 1. Okay.
So I want to again just try to simplify my system as much as possible. I'm not going to walk you through this. But if I
now was to think about what would my um what would be my uh initial condition
also in the SVD basis, I can do a similar similar algebra to this and see
that my initial condition would end up being kind of like this. I initially started at zero
in my new coordinates. My initial condition became minus war because I was looking at my error.
And now don't worry about this, but what I want you to see is that here the last d minus n entries are basically zero.
What that tells us is that all I really need to care about is the evolution of
the system according to this x twiddle and this z, right? Because my initial
condition doesn't have anything in the last d minus n coordinates and my state evolution also doesn't have anything in
the last d minus n coordinates. So I can basically reduce my attention to looking at this square
system x twiddle z equal to zero. Okay. And row
by row actually you can show I'm not going to do it right now but that the irow of this system is basically the
irow of your original system. Okay. So these are exactly the same things but
you're just focusing attention on the directions that matter and throwing away all the rest.
So how are we going to try and show that this thing actually converges? Well, if
I was to take a gradient descent step, this would be my loss function. And I would get a gradient descent step that
looks something like this. What would be the corresponding stochastic gradient descent step when I
have batch size one? So now until now we haven't really started, we haven't really dealt with
randomness. in the discussions that we have talked about so far. And now one of the things
I like about showing you this proof is that we have to wrestle with the inherent randomness of SGD. When I say
I'm doing SGD with batch size one and I'm picking iid over my initial data points, do I know which data point I'm
going to get? No, I don't know this. Right? So that
means that when I'm doing SGD, what I'm going to have here
is instead of this deterministic matrix XRPOSE X, I'm going to have
this matrix that is given by the specific data point I choose and I index
it by this it is the random index that
happens to be sampled at that time. Okay, so this is the SGD update that I get and we're just doing this for batch
size one. Does that make sense questions? So I'm
not going to calculate out the SGD gradient, you know, do this um u
actually it'll be on your homework so you will have to do it but you can do it on your own time. What I'm trying to
give you is a is the big ideas of the proof. You can check the algebra on your own time.
So now what we want to do is we want to say given this SGD update can we argue
that my quadratic loss is actually going to go to zero. I want to look at this
loss as it follows the path of evolution dictated by this dynamical system and
say what is happening to this quadratic function. This is very similar to problems that
those of you who have taken classes in control theory might have already seen, right? I see a controls person in the
room. What you're trying to say is that this
is my loss function. How do I show that is actually going to zero? One standard
technique for doing this is called leapono functions. You don't need to know what a leapono function is. But
what is the key idea? If I want to show that this thing goes to zero, well, if I
can tell you that at every step I take, I'm always decreasing,
I'm always only going down, and I furthermore tell you that I'm lower bounded by zero, that I can never cross
zero, then where am I going to go? I have to get to zero. Right? So basically, so you
can you can prove this, you know, you can analysis classes do this. There's lots of ways of proving this. We're not
going to do that. Just believe me on this principle. Intuitively, you can see that, right? If you're rolling down a hill, you're always moving downwards and
there's a floor, you can't get below that, you're eventually going to hit that floor. So that's the technique that
we're going to use to argue that this happens. And this is called the idea of a leap of function.
I have one minute. I will probably talk a little bit about this in the next lecture. But what I want to tell you now
is that the key insight that we are going to get from doing this proof is
we're going to see how this loss function evolves as a function of time as you're taking
steps. And we'll see that there's a part of it that looks kind of like gradient descent. And that will show that the
loss function is decreasing. And there's a part of it that we will show cannot
increase too much as long as your data points are not too large. And that will
give us a intuition again or a condition for why sometimes normalizing your data
and things like that are important in uh the deep learning problems that we care about. So I'm out of time to do this in
detail. I will teach you the rest of this proof in the next class. Do not forget to do homework zero. Please
submit it on time. I have office hours now in 400. Corey,
I'm just curious what's the expected time frame for homework zero. Like what is the expected amount of time I should
spend on doing the homework? It really depends on your preparation and how much time you're willing to put in. If you've taken guys all spend like
10 hours about the same, you know, is it like this every week
or is it more a whole one will be like a It's a hard class. Okay.
It's a hard class. Okay. Thanks.
Hi. Will we be able to know if like the weather